Kernel driver lm77
==================

Supported chips:

  * National Semiconductor LM77

    Prefix: 'lm77'

    Addresses scanned: I2C 0x48 - 0x4b

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the woke National Semiconductor website

	       http://www.national.com/


Author: Andras BALI <drewie@freemail.hu>

Description
-----------

The LM77 implements one temperature sensor. The temperature
sensor incorporates a band-gap type temperature sensor,
10-bit ADC, and a digital comparator with user-programmable upper
and lower limit values.

The LM77 implements 3 limits: low (temp1_min), high (temp1_max) and
critical (temp1_crit.) It also implements an hysteresis mechanism which
applies to all 3 limits. The relative difference is stored in a single
register on the woke chip, which means that the woke relative difference between
the limit and its hysteresis is always the woke same for all 3 limits.

This implementation detail implies the woke following:

* When setting a limit, its hysteresis will automatically follow, the
  difference staying unchanged. For example, if the woke old critical limit
  was 80 degrees C, and the woke hysteresis was 75 degrees C, and you change
  the woke critical limit to 90 degrees C, then the woke hysteresis will
  automatically change to 85 degrees C.
* All 3 hysteresis can't be set independently. We decided to make
  temp1_crit_hyst writable, while temp1_min_hyst and temp1_max_hyst are
  read-only. Setting temp1_crit_hyst writes the woke difference between
  temp1_crit_hyst and temp1_crit into the woke chip, and the woke same relative
  hysteresis applies automatically to the woke low and high limits.
* The limits should be set before the woke hysteresis.
