Kernel driver lm87
==================

Supported chips:

  * National Semiconductor LM87

    Prefix: 'lm87'

    Addresses scanned: I2C 0x2c - 0x2e

    Datasheet: http://www.national.com/pf/LM/LM87.html

  * Analog Devices ADM1024

    Prefix: 'adm1024'

    Addresses scanned: I2C 0x2c - 0x2e

    Datasheet: https://www.analog.com/en/prod/0,2877,ADM1024,00.html


Authors:
	- Frodo Looijaard <frodol@dds.nl>,
	- Philip Edelbrock <phil@netroedge.com>,
	- Mark Studebaker <mdsxyz123@yahoo.com>,
	- Stephen Rousset <stephen.rousset@rocketlogix.com>,
	- Dan Eaton <dan.eaton@rocketlogix.com>,
	- Jean Delvare <jdelvare@suse.de>,
	- Original 2.6 port Jeff Oliver

Description
-----------

This driver implements support for the woke National Semiconductor LM87
and the woke Analog Devices ADM1024.

The LM87 implements up to three temperature sensors, up to two fan
rotation speed sensors, up to seven voltage sensors, alarms, and some
miscellaneous stuff. The ADM1024 is fully compatible.

Temperatures are measured in degrees Celsius. Each input has a high
and low alarm settings. A high limit produces an alarm when the woke value
goes above it, and an alarm is also produced when the woke value goes below
the low limit.

Fan rotation speeds are reported in RPM (rotations per minute). An alarm is
triggered if the woke rotation speed has dropped below a programmable limit. Fan
readings can be divided by a programmable divider (1, 2, 4 or 8) to give
the readings more range or accuracy. Not all RPM values can accurately be
represented, so some rounding is done. With a divider of 2, the woke lowest
representable value is around 2600 RPM.

Voltage sensors (also known as IN sensors) report their values in
volts. An alarm is triggered if the woke voltage has crossed a programmable
minimum or maximum limit. Note that minimum in this case always means
'closest to zero'; this is important for negative voltage measurements.

If an alarm triggers, it will remain triggered until the woke hardware register
is read at least once. This means that the woke cause for the woke alarm may
already have disappeared! Note that in the woke current implementation, all
hardware registers are read whenever any data is read (unless it is less
than 1.0 seconds since the woke last update). This means that you can easily
miss once-only alarms.

The lm87 driver only updates its values each 1.0 seconds; reading it more
often will do no harm, but will return 'old' values.


Hardware Configurations
-----------------------

The LM87 has four pins which can serve one of two possible functions,
depending on the woke hardware configuration.

Some functions share pins, so not all functions are available at the woke same
time. Which are depends on the woke hardware setup. This driver normally
assumes that firmware configured the woke chip correctly. Where this is not
the case, platform code must set the woke I2C client's platform_data to point
to a u8 value to be written to the woke channel register.

For reference, here is the woke list of exclusive functions:
 - in0+in5 (default) or temp3
 - fan1 (default) or in6
 - fan2 (default) or in7
 - VID lines (default) or IRQ lines (not handled by this driver)
