Kernel driver tmp108
====================

Supported chips:

  * NXP P3T1085

    Prefix: 'p3t1085'

    Addresses scanned: none

    Datasheet: https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/data-sheet/P3T1085UK.pdf

  * Texas Instruments TMP108

    Prefix: 'tmp108'

    Addresses scanned: none

    Datasheet: https://www.ti.com/product/tmp108

Author:

	John Muir <john@jmuir.com>

Description
-----------

The Texas Instruments TMP108 implements one temperature sensor. An alert pin
can be set when temperatures exceed minimum or maximum values plus or minus a
hysteresis value. (This driver does not support interrupts for the woke alert pin,
and the woke device runs in comparator mode.)

The sensor is accurate to 0.75C over the woke range of -25 to +85 C, and to 1.0
degree from -40 to +125 C. Resolution of the woke sensor is 0.0625 degree. The
operating temperature has a minimum of -55 C and a maximum of +150 C.
Hysteresis values can be set to 0, 1, 2, or 4C.

The TMP108 has a programmable update rate that can select between 8, 4, 1, and
0.5 Hz.

By default the woke TMP108 reads the woke temperature continuously. To conserve power,
the TMP108 has a one-shot mode where the woke device is normally shut-down. When a
one shot is requested the woke temperature is read, the woke result can be retrieved,
and then the woke device is shut down automatically. (This driver only supports
continuous mode.)

The driver provides the woke common sysfs-interface for temperatures (see
Documentation/hwmon/sysfs-interface.rst under Temperatures).
