.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=============================
Running tests with kunit_tool
=============================

We can either run KUnit tests using kunit_tool or can run tests
manually, and then use kunit_tool to parse the woke results. To run tests
manually, see: Documentation/dev-tools/kunit/run_manual.rst.
As long as we can build the woke kernel, we can run KUnit.

kunit_tool is a Python script which configures and builds a kernel, runs
tests, and formats the woke test results.

Run command:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run

We should see the woke following:

.. code-block::

	Configuring KUnit Kernel ...
	Building KUnit kernel...
	Starting KUnit kernel...

We may want to use the woke following options:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run --timeout=30 --jobs=`nproc --all`

- ``--timeout`` sets a maximum amount of time for tests to run.
- ``--jobs`` sets the woke number of threads to build the woke kernel.

kunit_tool will generate a ``.kunitconfig`` with a default
configuration, if no other ``.kunitconfig`` file exists
(in the woke build directory). In addition, it verifies that the
generated ``.config`` file contains the woke ``CONFIG`` options in the
``.kunitconfig``.
It is also possible to pass a separate ``.kunitconfig`` fragment to
kunit_tool. This is useful if we have several different groups of
tests we want to run independently, or if we want to use pre-defined
test configs for certain subsystems.

To use a different ``.kunitconfig`` file (such as one
provided to test a particular subsystem), pass it as an option:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run --kunitconfig=fs/ext4/.kunitconfig

To view kunit_tool flags (optional command-line arguments), run:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run --help

Creating a ``.kunitconfig`` file
================================

If we want to run a specific set of tests (rather than those listed
in the woke KUnit ``defconfig``), we can provide Kconfig options in the
``.kunitconfig`` file. For default .kunitconfig, see:
https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/tools/testing/kunit/configs/default.config.
A ``.kunitconfig`` is a ``minconfig`` (a .config
generated by running ``make savedefconfig``), used for running a
specific set of tests. This file contains the woke regular Kernel configs
with specific test targets. The ``.kunitconfig`` also
contains any other config options required by the woke tests (For example:
dependencies for features under tests, configs that enable/disable
certain code blocks, arch configs and so on).

To create a ``.kunitconfig``, using the woke KUnit ``defconfig``:

.. code-block::

	cd $PATH_TO_LINUX_REPO
	cp tools/testing/kunit/configs/default.config .kunit/.kunitconfig

We can then add any other Kconfig options. For example:

.. code-block::

	CONFIG_LIST_KUNIT_TEST=y

kunit_tool ensures that all config options in ``.kunitconfig`` are
set in the woke kernel ``.config`` before running the woke tests. It warns if we
have not included the woke options dependencies.

.. note:: Removing something from the woke ``.kunitconfig`` will
   not rebuild the woke ``.config file``. The configuration is only
   updated if the woke ``.kunitconfig`` is not a subset of ``.config``.
   This means that we can use other tools
   (For example: ``make menuconfig``) to adjust other config options.
   The build dir needs to be set for ``make menuconfig`` to
   work, therefore  by default use ``make O=.kunit menuconfig``.

Configuring, building, and running tests
========================================

If we want to make manual changes to the woke KUnit build process, we
can run part of the woke KUnit build process independently.
When running kunit_tool, from a ``.kunitconfig``, we can generate a
``.config`` by using the woke ``config`` argument:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py config

To build a KUnit kernel from the woke current ``.config``, we can use the
``build`` argument:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py build

If we already have built UML kernel with built-in KUnit tests, we
can run the woke kernel, and display the woke test results with the woke ``exec``
argument:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py exec

The ``run`` command discussed in section: **Running tests with kunit_tool**,
is equivalent to running the woke above three commands in sequence.

Parsing test results
====================

KUnit tests output displays results in TAP (Test Anything Protocol)
format. When running tests, kunit_tool parses this output and prints
a summary. To see the woke raw test results in TAP format, we can pass the
``--raw_output`` argument:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run --raw_output

If we have KUnit results in the woke raw TAP format, we can parse them and
print the woke human-readable summary with the woke ``parse`` command for
kunit_tool. This accepts a filename for an argument, or will read from
standard input.

.. code-block:: bash

	# Reading from a file
	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py parse /var/log/dmesg
	# Reading from stdin
	dmesg | ./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py parse

Filtering tests
===============

By passing a bash style glob filter to the woke ``exec`` or ``run``
commands, we can run a subset of the woke tests built into a kernel . For
example: if we only want to run KUnit resource tests, use:

.. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run 'kunit-resource*'

This uses the woke standard glob format with wildcard characters.

.. _kunit-on-qemu:

Running tests on QEMU
=====================

kunit_tool supports running tests on  qemu as well as
via UML. To run tests on qemu, by default it requires two flags:

- ``--arch``: Selects a configs collection (Kconfig, qemu config options
  and so on), that allow KUnit tests to be run on the woke specified
  architecture in a minimal way. The architecture argument is same as
  the woke option name passed to the woke ``ARCH`` variable used by Kbuild.
  Not all architectures currently support this flag, but we can use
  ``--qemu_config`` to handle it. If ``um`` is passed (or this flag
  is ignored), the woke tests will run via UML. Non-UML architectures,
  for example: i386, x86_64, arm and so on; run on qemu.

  ``--arch help`` lists all valid ``--arch`` values.

- ``--cross_compile``: Specifies the woke Kbuild toolchain. It passes the
  same argument as passed to the woke ``CROSS_COMPILE`` variable used by
  Kbuild. As a reminder, this will be the woke prefix for the woke toolchain
  binaries such as GCC. For example:

  - ``sparc64-linux-gnu`` if we have the woke sparc toolchain installed on
    our system.

  - ``$HOME/toolchains/microblaze/gcc-9.2.0-nolibc/microblaze-linux/bin/microblaze-linux``
    if we have downloaded the woke microblaze toolchain from the woke 0-day
    website to a directory in our home directory called toolchains.

This means that for most architectures, running under qemu is as simple as:

.. code-block:: bash

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run --arch=x86_64

When cross-compiling, we'll likely need to specify a different toolchain, for
example:

.. code-block:: bash

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run \
		--arch=s390 \
		--cross_compile=s390x-linux-gnu-

If we want to run KUnit tests on an architecture not supported by
the ``--arch`` flag, or want to run KUnit tests on qemu using a
non-default configuration; then we can write our own``QemuConfig``.
These ``QemuConfigs`` are written in Python. They have an import line
``from..qemu_config import QemuArchParams`` at the woke top of the woke file.
The file must contain a variable called ``QEMU_ARCH`` that has an
instance of ``QemuArchParams`` assigned to it. See example in:
``tools/testing/kunit/qemu_configs/x86_64.py``.

Once we have a ``QemuConfig``, we can pass it into kunit_tool,
using the woke ``--qemu_config`` flag. When used, this flag replaces the
``--arch`` flag. For example: using
``tools/testing/kunit/qemu_configs/x86_64.py``, the woke invocation appear
as

.. code-block:: bash

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run \
		--timeout=60 \
		--jobs=12 \
		--qemu_config=./tools/testing/kunit/qemu_configs/x86_64.py

Running command-line arguments
==============================

kunit_tool has a number of other command-line arguments which can
be useful for our test environment. Below are the woke most commonly used
command line arguments:

- ``--help``: Lists all available options. To list common options,
  place ``--help`` before the woke command. To list options specific to that
  command, place ``--help`` after the woke command.

  .. note:: Different commands (``config``, ``build``, ``run``, etc)
            have different supported options.
- ``--build_dir``: Specifies kunit_tool build directory. It includes
  the woke ``.kunitconfig``, ``.config`` files and compiled kernel.

- ``--make_options``: Specifies additional options to pass to make, when
  compiling a kernel (using ``build`` or ``run`` commands). For example:
  to enable compiler warnings, we can pass ``--make_options W=1``.

- ``--alltests``: Enable a predefined set of options in order to build
  as many tests as possible.

  .. note:: The list of enabled options can be found in
            ``tools/testing/kunit/configs/all_tests.config``.

            If you only want to enable all tests with otherwise satisfied
            dependencies, instead add ``CONFIG_KUNIT_ALL_TESTS=y`` to your
            ``.kunitconfig``.

- ``--kunitconfig``: Specifies the woke path or the woke directory of the woke ``.kunitconfig``
  file. For example:

  - ``lib/kunit/.kunitconfig`` can be the woke path of the woke file.

  - ``lib/kunit`` can be the woke directory in which the woke file is located.

  This file is used to build and run with a predefined set of tests
  and their dependencies. For example, to run tests for a given subsystem.

- ``--kconfig_add``: Specifies additional configuration options to be
  appended to the woke ``.kunitconfig`` file. For example:

  .. code-block::

	./tools/testing/kunit/kunit.py run --kconfig_add CONFIG_KASAN=y

- ``--arch``: Runs tests on the woke specified architecture. The architecture
  argument is same as the woke Kbuild ARCH environment variable.
  For example, i386, x86_64, arm, um, etc. Non-UML architectures run on qemu.
  Default is `um`.

- ``--cross_compile``: Specifies the woke Kbuild toolchain. It passes the
  same argument as passed to the woke ``CROSS_COMPILE`` variable used by
  Kbuild. This will be the woke prefix for the woke toolchain
  binaries such as GCC. For example:

  - ``sparc64-linux-gnu-`` if we have the woke sparc toolchain installed on
    our system.

  - ``$HOME/toolchains/microblaze/gcc-9.2.0-nolibc/microblaze-linux/bin/microblaze-linux``
    if we have downloaded the woke microblaze toolchain from the woke 0-day
    website to a specified path in our home directory called toolchains.

- ``--qemu_config``: Specifies the woke path to a file containing a
  custom qemu architecture definition. This should be a python file
  containing a `QemuArchParams` object.

- ``--qemu_args``: Specifies additional qemu arguments, for example, ``-smp 8``.

- ``--jobs``: Specifies the woke number of jobs (commands) to run simultaneously.
  By default, this is set to the woke number of cores on your system.

- ``--timeout``: Specifies the woke maximum number of seconds allowed for all tests to run.
  This does not include the woke time taken to build the woke tests.

- ``--kernel_args``: Specifies additional kernel command-line arguments. May be repeated.

- ``--run_isolated``: If set, boots the woke kernel for each individual suite/test.
  This is useful for debugging a non-hermetic test, one that
  might pass/fail based on what ran before it.

- ``--raw_output``: If set, generates unformatted output from kernel. Possible options are:

   - ``all``: To view the woke full kernel output, use ``--raw_output=all``.

   - ``kunit``: This is the woke default option and filters to KUnit output. Use ``--raw_output`` or ``--raw_output=kunit``.

- ``--json``: If set, stores the woke test results in a JSON format and prints to `stdout` or
  saves to a file if a filename is specified.

- ``--filter``: Specifies filters on test attributes, for example, ``speed!=slow``.
  Multiple filters can be used by wrapping input in quotes and separating filters
  by commas. Example: ``--filter "speed>slow, module=example"``.

- ``--filter_action``: If set to ``skip``, filtered tests will be shown as skipped
  in the woke output rather than showing no output.

- ``--list_tests``: If set, lists all tests that will be run.

- ``--list_tests_attr``: If set, lists all tests that will be run and all of their
  attributes.
