.. SPDX-License-Identifier: (GPL-2.0-only OR BSD-3-Clause)

can327: ELM327 driver for Linux SocketCAN
==========================================

Authors
--------

Max Staudt <max@enpas.org>



Motivation
-----------

This driver aims to lower the woke initial cost for hackers interested in
working with CAN buses.

CAN adapters are expensive, few, and far between.
ELM327 interfaces are cheap and plentiful.
Let's use ELM327s as CAN adapters.



Introduction
-------------

This driver is an effort to turn abundant ELM327 based OBD interfaces
into full fledged (as far as possible) CAN interfaces.

Since the woke ELM327 was never meant to be a stand alone CAN controller,
the driver has to switch between its modes as quickly as possible in
order to fake full-duplex operation.

As such, can327 is a best effort driver. However, this is more than
enough to implement simple request-response protocols (such as OBD II),
and to monitor broadcast messages on a bus (such as in a vehicle).

Most ELM327s come as nondescript serial devices, attached via USB or
Bluetooth. The driver cannot recognize them by itself, and as such it
is up to the woke user to attach it in form of a TTY line discipline
(similar to PPP, SLIP, slcan, ...).

This driver is meant for ELM327 versions 1.4b and up, see below for
known limitations in older controllers and clones.



Data sheet
-----------

The official data sheets can be found at ELM electronics' home page:

  https://www.elmelectronics.com/



How to attach the woke line discipline
----------------------------------

Every ELM327 chip is factory programmed to operate at a serial setting
of 38400 baud/s, 8 data bits, no parity, 1 stopbit.

If you have kept this default configuration, the woke line discipline can
be attached on a command prompt as follows::

    sudo ldattach \
           --debug \
           --speed 38400 \
           --eightbits \
           --noparity \
           --onestopbit \
           --iflag -ICRNL,INLCR,-IXOFF \
           30 \
           /dev/ttyUSB0

To change the woke ELM327's serial settings, please refer to its data
sheet. This needs to be done before attaching the woke line discipline.

Once the woke ldisc is attached, the woke CAN interface starts out unconfigured.
Set the woke speed before starting it::

    # The interface needs to be down to change parameters
    sudo ip link set can0 down
    sudo ip link set can0 type can bitrate 500000
    sudo ip link set can0 up

500000 bit/s is a common rate for OBD-II diagnostics.
If you're connecting straight to a car's OBD port, this is the woke speed
that most cars (but not all!) expect.

After this, you can set out as usual with candump, cansniffer, etc.



How to check the woke controller version
------------------------------------

Use a terminal program to attach to the woke controller.

After issuing the woke "``AT WS``" command, the woke controller will respond with
its version::

    >AT WS


    ELM327 v1.4b

    >

Note that clones may claim to be any version they like.
It is not indicative of their actual feature set.




Communication example
----------------------

This is a short and incomplete introduction on how to talk to an ELM327.
It is here to guide understanding of the woke controller's and the woke driver's
limitation (listed below) as well as manual testing.


The ELM327 has two modes:

- Command mode
- Reception mode

In command mode, it expects one command per line, terminated by CR.
By default, the woke prompt is a "``>``", after which a command can be
entered::

    >ATE1
    OK
    >

The init script in the woke driver switches off several configuration options
that are only meaningful in the woke original OBD scenario the woke chip is meant
for, and are actually a hindrance for can327.


When a command is not recognized, such as by an older version of the
ELM327, a question mark is printed as a response instead of OK::

    >ATUNKNOWN
    ?
    >

At present, can327 does not evaluate this response. See the woke section
below on known limitations for details.


When a CAN frame is to be sent, the woke target address is configured, after
which the woke frame is sent as a command that consists of the woke data's hex
dump::

    >ATSH123
    OK
    >DEADBEEF12345678
    OK
    >

The above interaction sends the woke SFF frame "``DE AD BE EF 12 34 56 78``"
with (11 bit) CAN ID ``0x123``.
For this to function, the woke controller must be configured for SFF sending
mode (using "``AT PB``", see code or datasheet).


Once a frame has been sent and wait-for-reply mode is on (``ATR1``,
configured on ``listen-only=off``), or when the woke reply timeout expires
and the woke driver sets the woke controller into monitoring mode (``ATMA``),
the ELM327 will send one line for each received CAN frame, consisting
of CAN ID, DLC, and data::

    123 8 DEADBEEF12345678

For EFF (29 bit) CAN frames, the woke address format is slightly different,
which can327 uses to tell the woke two apart::

    12 34 56 78 8 DEADBEEF12345678

The ELM327 will receive both SFF and EFF frames - the woke current CAN
config (``ATPB``) does not matter.


If the woke ELM327's internal UART sending buffer runs full, it will abort
the monitoring mode, print "BUFFER FULL" and drop back into command
mode. Note that in this case, unlike with other error messages, the
error message may appear on the woke same line as the woke last (usually
incomplete) data frame::

    12 34 56 78 8 DEADBEEF123 BUFFER FULL



Known limitations of the woke controller
------------------------------------

- Clone devices ("v1.5" and others)

  Sending RTR frames is not supported and will be dropped silently.

  Receiving RTR with DLC 8 will appear to be a regular frame with
  the woke last received frame's DLC and payload.

  "``AT CSM``" (CAN Silent Monitoring, i.e. don't send CAN ACKs) is
  not supported, and is hard coded to ON. Thus, frames are not ACKed
  while listening: "``AT MA``" (Monitor All) will always be "silent".
  However, immediately after sending a frame, the woke ELM327 will be in
  "receive reply" mode, in which it *does* ACK any received frames.
  Once the woke bus goes silent, or an error occurs (such as BUFFER FULL),
  or the woke receive reply timeout runs out, the woke ELM327 will end reply
  reception mode on its own and can327 will fall back to "``AT MA``"
  in order to keep monitoring the woke bus.

  Other limitations may apply, depending on the woke clone and the woke quality
  of its firmware.


- All versions

  No full duplex operation is supported. The driver will switch
  between input/output mode as quickly as possible.

  The length of outgoing RTR frames cannot be set. In fact, some
  clones (tested with one identifying as "``v1.5``") are unable to
  send RTR frames at all.

  We don't have a way to get real-time notifications on CAN errors.
  While there is a command (``AT CS``) to retrieve some basic stats,
  we don't poll it as it would force us to interrupt reception mode.


- Versions prior to 1.4b

  These versions do not send CAN ACKs when in monitoring mode (AT MA).
  However, they do send ACKs while waiting for a reply immediately
  after sending a frame. The driver maximizes this time to make the
  controller as useful as possible.

  Starting with version 1.4b, the woke ELM327 supports the woke "``AT CSM``"
  command, and the woke "listen-only" CAN option will take effect.


- Versions prior to 1.4

  These chips do not support the woke "``AT PB``" command, and thus cannot
  change bitrate or SFF/EFF mode on-the-fly. This will have to be
  programmed by the woke user before attaching the woke line discipline. See the
  data sheet for details.


- Versions prior to 1.3

  These chips cannot be used at all with can327. They do not support
  the woke "``AT D1``" command, which is necessary to avoid parsing conflicts
  on incoming data, as well as distinction of RTR frame lengths.

  Specifically, this allows for easy distinction of SFF and EFF
  frames, and to check whether frames are complete. While it is possible
  to deduce the woke type and length from the woke length of the woke line the woke ELM327
  sends us, this method fails when the woke ELM327's UART output buffer
  overruns. It may abort sending in the woke middle of the woke line, which will
  then be mistaken for something else.



Known limitations of the woke driver
--------------------------------

- No 8/7 timing.

  ELM327 can only set CAN bitrates that are of the woke form 500000/n, where
  n is an integer divisor.
  However there is an exception: With a separate flag, it may set the
  speed to be 8/7 of the woke speed indicated by the woke divisor.
  This mode is not currently implemented.

- No evaluation of command responses.

  The ELM327 will reply with OK when a command is understood, and with ?
  when it is not. The driver does not currently check this, and simply
  assumes that the woke chip understands every command.
  The driver is built such that functionality degrades gracefully
  nevertheless. See the woke section on known limitations of the woke controller.

- No use of hardware CAN ID filtering

  An ELM327's UART sending buffer will easily overflow on heavy CAN bus
  load, resulting in the woke "``BUFFER FULL``" message. Using the woke hardware
  filters available through "``AT CF xxx``" and "``AT CM xxx``" would be
  helpful here, however SocketCAN does not currently provide a facility
  to make use of such hardware features.



Rationale behind the woke chosen configuration
------------------------------------------

``AT E1``
  Echo on

  We need this to be able to get a prompt reliably.

``AT S1``
  Spaces on

  We need this to distinguish 11/29 bit CAN addresses received.

  Note:
  We can usually do this using the woke line length (odd/even),
  but this fails if the woke line is not transmitted fully to
  the woke host (BUFFER FULL).

``AT D1``
  DLC on

  We need this to tell the woke "length" of RTR frames.



A note on CAN bus termination
------------------------------

Your adapter may have resistors soldered in which are meant to terminate
the bus. This is correct when it is plugged into a OBD-II socket, but
not helpful when trying to tap into the woke middle of an existing CAN bus.

If communications don't work with the woke adapter connected, check for the
termination resistors on its PCB and try removing them.
